<DOCUMENT filename="Cultures_Of_Calradia_Sturgia.txt">
# Faction: Sturgia (The Principality of Sturgia)
Overview
The Sturgians are a hardy, river-faring people of the frozen north — a volatile confederation of principalities, fjord-clans, and forest strongholds occupying the snowy mountain territories of northernmost Calradia. Their culture is a recent fusion of native northern tribes and Nordic migrants, creating a society that is simultaneously violent and warlike yet shrewdly mercantile. Towering warriors with flaxen or red hair, elaborate tattoos of ravens, bears, and runes, and a love of mead-halls, sagas, and longships define them. Sturgians value strength, blood-oaths, cunning trade, and independence above all.
Geography & Economy
Sturgia’s forbidding forests and cold mountains are rich in wild honey, bog iron, and — most prized of all — furs of fox, rabbit, and ermine. For centuries traders ventured into the woods to barter with the tribes. When the Calradic Empire expanded eastward, that trickle became a flood. Boomtowns sprang up along the great slow rivers that feed the inland lake, linking northern seas to the imperial heartlands. These river-cities export furs, amber, timber, salted fish, and honey while importing spices, wine, and steel. Wealthy boyars and merchant-princes control river tolls and longship fleets. Long winters force communities to raid or trade south when the rivers freeze.
History & Formation of the Principality
The Principality of Sturgia is young — barely a century old. Until around 984 AE the north was a patchwork of small tribal kingdoms and rival clans. Nordic traders and adventurers migrated from the northeast territories (the Nordlands) seeking land and wealth. They formed diplomatic and marriage alliances with the native tribes of the Sturgian region, merging the two cultures into something new: a violent, warlike, yet mercantile people. Tribal elders sealed pacts with wedding vows and used their share of the trading profits to hire Nordic mercenaries to subdue neighboring tribes.
Under growing pressure from the expanding Calradic Empire, the local leaders elected a single prince to lead them in war. What began as a temporary war-leader position gradually became hereditary. The confederation of small kingdoms coalesced into the Principality of Sturgia, eventually becoming the great powerhouse of the north. Yet the idea of monarchy has never sat easily with the fiercely independent boyars — the potential for rebellion always simmers beneath the surface of Sturgian politics.
The Vaegir Guard & the New Faith
Centuries of contact with the Empire produced the legendary Vaegir Guard — elite Sturgian shock troops and imperial bodyguards famed for their loyalty, axe-work, and brutal close-quarters fighting. Many Vaegir veterans returned home with gold, land, imperial weapons, and — most fatefully — the Ascendant Rite (the New Faith).
After 950 AE the New Faith spread rapidly. Returning captains built wooden churches and sponsored missionaries. By 1084 AE roughly 40 % of Sturgian towns and half the ruling princes have converted. The faith’s promise of a single ascending god of light, order, and redemption appeals to those weary of blood-feuds and endless winters.
However, the majority of rural clans, forest folk, and traditional jarls still cling to the Sturgian Old Gods / Old Northern Faith — a polytheistic pantheon of thunder gods, wolf-spirits, river-maidens, and ancestral heroes. Sacred groves, rune-carved standing stones, and midwinter blot ceremonies remain common in the deep north. This religious schism has created dangerous friction: temple burnings, blood-feuds, and accusations of ancestral betrayal. Some radical Old Faith cults have even turned to darker Unveiling-touched rituals to summon spirits against the “southern heresy.”
Society & Government
Ruled by Grand Prince Raganvad, Sturgia is a loose high-king elective system in theory, though the office has become hereditary in practice. The Veche (assembly of boyars and free warriors) still holds real power and can challenge the prince. Powerful boyar families and independent jarls rule their own river-cities or forest holds. Slavery exists but is milder than elsewhere — thralls can earn freedom through service or ransom. Women frequently serve as shield-maidens, rune-mistresses, or merchant-wives. The druzhina (sworn warrior retinues) form the backbone of every lord’s power.
Military
Sturgians excel in riverine and forest warfare.

Core troops: Heavily armoured axe-and-shield infantry, bearded axes, long spears, and mail hauberks.
Specialists: Vaegir veterans (elite heavy infantry with imperial training), steppe-influenced horse-archers, and swift longship raiders.
Tactics: Ambush from treelines, shield-walls on frozen rivers, and lightning raids.

The Unveiling hits Sturgia hard. In deep winter the False Moon turns snow silver-blue and awakens frost-wights and ice-trolls from the bogs. Old Faith shamans call it the eye of a forgotten winter god; Ascendant priests see it as a test of faith.
Current Situation (March 1084 AE)
As the Calradic Empire collapses, Sturgian princes sense opportunity. Some Vaegir-descended lords eye southern lands for new principalities; traditional jarls prefer raiding weakened imperial borders. The monarchy-boyar tension, combined with the New Faith vs. Old Gods divide, threatens to fracture the north into civil war even as Khuzait raids press from the east and imperial refugees flood south.
